---
bibfile: ccnlab.bib
---

# Introduction {#sec:ch-intro}

Introductory Psychology textbooks typically provide a rather fragmented, "factoid" based view of the field, relying on colorful graphics, exciting news stories, and anecdotes to generate interest in the material.  This book represents a radical departure from that approach, with the goal to provide a succinct, coherent, principled account of the human mental world and how it emerges from our brains.  There is a linear narrative story, intended to be read like a regular book, instead of jumping around looking at the figures and key words.

The overall portrait painted of you looks something like this (caution: it is not overly flattering, and you might even think this song is not about you, but go ahead and be vain --- it is): You are obsessed with controlling your environment to satisfy a range of core desires and to mitigate strong fears.  You are unlikely to be swayed by other people's advice, but have no problem dishing it out.  A challenge to your social standing or any other form of disrespect (the *diss*) is one of the worst offenses, not to be tolerated.  You are willing to spin all manner of stories to maintain your sense of order in the world, *especially* when that sense is strongly challenged, often to the point of absurdity in the eyes of others.

You crave simple ways of understanding the world, to the point of massively over-simplifying the true complexities and ambiguities, preferring to think in terms of concrete anecdotes instead of broad abstractions, logical arguments, or, especially, statistics.  You think you know how most stuff you use everyday works (bikes, cars, toilets..), but studies show that you are actually remarkably clueless [@Keil81; @SlomanFernbach18] --- how exactly does that chain on a bike work?  Perhaps most glaringly, you can't help but think in terms of stereotypes, and inevitably focus on information that is consistent with your existing views, while ignoring all those nagging hints that all may not be as simple as you might like.

You only care about things that are new and unexpected, and are constantly comparing and evaluating yourself and others with a keen eye for who is doing better or worse along any number of important dimensions (wealth, beauty, smarts, athletic ability, popularity --- you name it!)  You are hypersensitive to who might be cheating or gaming the system, but are perhaps not so aware of unfair advantages you might have.  More generally, you tend to think of yourself as being "your own person" and strongly underestimate how strong of an influence other people actually have over you.  If you're honest with yourself, you'll admit that you spend way too much time thinking about what what other people think of you --- without recognizing that everyone else is doing the same thing, so that in fact the answer is a somewhat disappointing: "not much" (unless of course you do something embarrassing or strange or stupid, but even then, your memory of those events will typically far outlast those of others).

In other words, you are a *survivor*.  You are a tough cookie.  Your ancestors survived unbelievable hardships to get you here, to your relatively plush college-educated world.  You are amazingly efficient.  All those crazy details you don't know about the world are largely irrelevant anyway.  Seriously, does it really matter that you don't know how the engine or transmission in your car works?  You can drive, and get to where you need to go --- and that is what really matters.  Your brain is exquisitely tuned into what really matters, and despite over 60 years of attempts to recreate the magic of your brain in a computer, nothing has come even close (despite all the recent media hype to the contrary).

And yet, despite all your toughness and amazing abilities, you are very likely to have at least some level of significant mental dysfunction.  You are more likely than not to suffer from depression, anxiety disorders (and often both of those together), drug dependence, or a number of other rarer mental maladies.  Unfortunately, the promise of a magic pill to cure these afflictions has turned out to be yet another disappointment.  In fact, regular old "talking to another human being about your problems" (i.e., therapy, which is actually somewhat more involved and structured than that) is likely to be more effective than medication for most people.  At our core, we are fundamentally social animals, and social support is the best medicine and a strong predictor of overall health and happiness.

## The Three C's

Surprisingly, we can make sense of all the above (and more!) using only three core principles:

### Compression

Each +neuron in the most important part of your brain (the +neocortex) is wired for simplification, and the collective effect of the massive waves of electrical activity surging through your brain every +millisecond is to compress, reduce, and simplify information.  Each neuron receives input signals from roughly 10,000 or so other neurons, but guess how much it can then say about that flood of information coming in?  Almost nothing.  First of all, it only has *one* output signal, the *spike*, which is an all-or-nothing affair.  Furthermore, a typical neocortical +pyramidal neuron will fire at most around 100 spikes in a second.  And a second is a relatively long time in the inner loops of the brain --- there is evidence that 1/10th of a second (100 milliseconds) represents a basic time-frame for information processing, so those 100 spikes reduce down to just 10 spikes within that critical window.  And most neurons are firing far less rapidly than that.  It's like when you tell your friend all your deepest thoughts, and they just say "huh".  Neurons are the strong, silent type most of the time.  But still waters run deep: when neurons *do* get excited about something, it is likely to be *important*, and most of what they are doing is *shielding you from constant TMI* (too-much-information --- but you knew that already, so, kind of a meta thing we got going there...)

The raw scene coming into your eyeballs is truly gory: all jumbles of light, motion and color.  When you were a tiny baby, you were overwhelmed by this "blooming buzzing confusion", but now your neural networks have learned and developed to the point where you don't (can't!) even see that raw sensation anymore (unless you partake of various +hallucinogenic substances, but even then, the level of disorder experienced is trifling compared to the pure chaos of the raw, unfiltered tidal wave of sensation coming in).  We get small, fascinating hints of the magic power of our perceptual systems through illusions, and the occasional "viral gold / blue / brown dress" controversy, where people see or hear strikingly different things from the same stimulus.  But overall, we really have absolutely no idea how much undercover cleanup work is going on inside our brains.  If anyone was truly aware of the level of conspiracy operating in there, it would be scandalous.  But, somehow, amazingly, we largely all end up with the same stable, boring illusions of simplicity.  A table.  A chair.  Some french fries.  People walking down the street.  Cars driving by.  Nothing strange going on here.

We would be utterly nonfunctional without this compression.  For the same reason that those hallucinogenic drugs render people nonfunctional.  If you want to do something useful with your time, you need to be able to make everything else in the world boring and irrelevant, so you can focus on *what matters*.  If you're reading a book, or your tiny screen, it simply wouldn't work if every time you moved your eyes, the whole world was seen afresh, requiring you to reorient and rediscover what you were just reading and what you need to read next.  Interestingly, this capacity for perceiving a stable, boring world seems to depend on an active process of +prediction --- your brain is stitching everything together into a seamless whole by filling in the gaps with what you *expect* or *predict* to see.  You can easily see this, and relive some of your early jumbled sensations, by simply closing one eye, and then gently pushing on the bottom of the eyelid of your other, open eye.  Suddenly, the world starts moving again! (Seriously, try it!)  *Why is this happening?*  *Why doesn't this normally happen when your eyes are constantly moving around roughly 10 times every second?*

Your brain's desire for simplification (compression) does not stop with +perception.  Your highest levels of thought are similarly dominated by the same quest to make everything simple and predictable.  Instead of recognizing the incredible high-dimensional diversity of our fellow beings, we inevitably reduce everyone to [stereotypes](#stereotype).  Even members of negatively stereotyped groups are caught in the evil maw of this process, exhibiting similar levels of stereotype-driven biases as everyone else.  The ultimate expression of this compression process is the +anosagnosia of everyday life (aka the *Dunning-Kruger* effect; see this [New York Times Article](https://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/06/20/the-anosognosics-dilemma-1/)) --- the lack of knowledge about our utter lack of knowledge.  People can be remarkably unaware about what they don't know, and sometimes, this leads to funny situations.  But, amazingly, most of the time, *it causes no obvious problems whatsoever*.  We just keep getting on with our lives.  And, as with perception, if we didn't, we'd never get anything done, because there is such a huge amount of stuff we routinely, safely ignore, that it would take many many lifetimes to process and understand it all.

### Contrast

The next principle explains why we seem so fixated on comparing ourselves with others.  Not just any others, but those certain people *who really get to you*.  In that inexplicable, frustrating way.  Why do I always have to be so jealous of those people?  Can't I convince myself that the "grass is always greener?"  Nope.  As with compression, your brain is wired at the lowest level for magnifying contrasts, in this case via a special class of neurons called an +inhibitory +interneuron, along with other important properties of all neurons that we'll cover in [@sec:ch-neuro]. The net effect is that your brain only sees things *relatively* (yep, we can have our own, special, +relativity law in psychology too --- actually it is pretty general).

A classic example of this is when you come in from the bright sunny outdoors into a dimly-lit room.  The difference in raw light energy coming into your eyeballs in these two situations is enormous, but, after a brief period of +adaptation, you're seeing things in the dim room that differ by a few +photons here or there, whereas outside those few photons would be a tiny drop in the bucket that you would never even notice.  Another example comes from the mind-bending differences in wealth among people: for 100-billionaires like Bill Gates, $100 is worth in relative terms the equivalent of a penny to a person with a net worth of $10,000,000 --- and much less than a penny for people of more typical means.  The brain automatically adapts to these relative differences, which is why rich people are never satisfied despite the huge existing wealth differences.

In technical terms, our neurons [normalize](#normalized) away the raw strength of whatever signal is coming into them, and remain sensitive to the *relative differences* compared to that overall signal.  Those inhibitory neurons play the critical role of mathematically *dividing away* the raw signal strength, leaving the main pyramidal neurons "in the zone" for responding to relative differences.   While this is essential for being able to see well despite huge differences in overall brightness, it seems that it might be rather less beneficial for the functioning of our society in the case of wealth and other such social differences.

![Illustration of the power of contrast in perception.  Do you think the physical image-level color of square A is the same or different from that of B?  Unbelievably, they are identical!  The relative contrast between light and dark squares makes us see them as lighter and darker than they really are.  Also, we accurately take into account the effect of a shadow from the cylinder, which our brain automatically factors out, making the checkerboard squares appear to be the same underlying color --- we see the stable underlying state of the world, not the highly variable raw signals coming into our eyeballs, and *contrast* and *compression* operating in the neural networks of your brain are what make this happen.](../figures/fig_shadow_contrast_cylinder.png){#fig:fig-checker-shadow width=40%}

As with compression, perception provides some of the clearest windows into the contrast phenomenon. For example, take a look at [@Fig:fig-checker-shadow] which shows the remarkable effects of contrast (and global scene understanding) on perception of color and brightness.   Another remarkable example is the case of *perfect pitch* --- why is it so unusual a skill for people to simply be able to recognize the absolute frequency of a sound?  Mechanically, and mathematically, extracting such a frequency from a sound signal is trivial, and simple (a "Snark"-like guitar tuning device can be had for a few bucks).  That this feat is so incredibly rare and difficult in humans just highlights the extent to which our brains ignore absolutes, and only deal with relative contrasts --- e.g., most people can easily tell which of two tones has a higher relative pitch.

But contrast, like compression, is not restricted to perception.  It affects every level of thought, contributing to that insidious obsession with your relative standing among your peers.  For example, studies routinely show that the absolute amount of money that people make is largely unrelated to various measures of their happiness --- instead, what matters is their perceived level of income *relative to their peers*.

Contrast operates over time as well, in several important ways.  First, at the perceptual level, we are highly sensitive to the rate of change over time of stimuli.  The classic example here is the slow approach to boil being unnoticed by a hapless frog until it is too late (this is not exactly true --- you can't get all the way to boiling, but you can get pretty hot).  Similarly, a cottage industry of amazing demonstrations of our inability to detect slow changes in visual scenes sprung up a few years ago: [YouTube video by Dan Simons](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1nL5ulsWMYc).  Once you become aware (upon repeated viewing or instruction) of the nature of these changes, it is truly astounding to realize how much you overlooked them the first time(s).  If you rapidly flip between the start and end frames of these slow-moving videos, the changes pop immediately into view.  Again, we see the +delta (relative change), not the absolute value of things, and if the changes are too slow, we don't notice the changes.

Nowhere is this more poignant, and pressing, than deep inside the +dopamine system in the middle of your brain.  As you likely already know (and would thus be annoyed to have me repeat, but I'm going to do it anyway, to prove the pertinent point), dopamine is widely believed to be the "pleasure drug" in your brain.  It is associated with drugs of +addiction, and actually most other major mental disorders in one way or another.  However, this popular description of dopamine leaves out one of the most important points: dopamine is *not* about *raw* pleasure, but rather, about the *difference* between what you experience and what you *expected* to experience.  Specifically, if you get exactly what you expected, your dopamine goes "meh".  This soul-crushing response to your greatest accomplishments is exactly what critics do to performers, and indeed the dopamine system is best understood as being the *central critic* of your brain.  Far from a center of epicurian delights, it is a hard-nosed bully that is never satisfied.  And that dissatisfaction is what has driven us ever upward in all manner of exploits --- many of them good, but many of them not so good.

Going back to our example of billionaires and wealth inequality, greed is a direct byproduct of your dopamine system.  Seriously, why in the world can't someone who already has millions or billions of dollars just be happy with that, and give the rest away or do something else useful with it (and their all-too-brief lives).  Because dopamine adapts quickly to that million-dollar feeling, and it keeps giving you back that critical "meh" response.  You need more than that.  You *deserve* more than that... It really is tough living with such an asshole critic in your head all the time.  But then again, we really do owe every step of "progress", within our individual lives and as a society and a species, to that nasty little critic driving us ever upward and onward.

Another notorious consequence of our dopamine systems is the familiar +stereotype of the rock-n-roll star or movie star ruining their lives with drugs.  Again, you've got these people who should just be plain tickled to be where they are in life, and they just can't get enough!  Its that darn contrast effect again: when you get off the stage and go back to your house and contemplate a few days of humdrum living, it is just a massive letdown.  Drugs are an attempt to recapture that amazing feeling, all the time.  Too bad they too just become another thing you adapt to (that's what +addiction+ is: +tolerance is the technical term), so you need more and more to get that same fleeting feeling --- until you have become, comfortably numb...

Finally, another obvious manifestation of the contrast principle is our collective obsession with the *news*.  Especially with the advent of the 24hr news cycle and the constant updating of news information via electronic, online media, we are now living in a quickly-moving bubble of news that sweeps things up in its path and spits them out quicker than... yesterday's news.  Or yesterhour's news.  If you don't check in quickly enough (for fear-of-missing-out; FOMO), you'll likely miss huge swaths of news.  In the "good old days", people used to read *weekly* news magazines (e.g., *Time*, *Newsweek*) --- can you *imagine* reading news that might be an entire *week* old!?

Everyone worries about this kind of thing, but really it is just what our brains are wired to do.  Every conscious moment of our lives is driven by a thirst for knowing what has changed, what is different --- anything that remains constant will quickly drift out of your mind, like that delicious aroma of dinner that I can no longer access (pro tip: go outside for just a minute or two --- you'll be amazed at what you've been ignoring!), or, thankfully, that feeling of my butt sitting on this chair that I was thoroughly *so over with* until I just wrote that sentence..

### Control

Last but certainly not least, is our obsession with *control*.  Some of you may be thinking that you're not a control freak like those *other people*, but actually, every one of us is a crazy control freak at some level --- it just differs in terms of what matters to us.  Anyone want to have some stranger come pick you up and take you around to work with them all day?  Or just invade your personal space?  How would you feel if someone just started selling all your stuff on craigslist?  Or how about those people who go door-to-door (or stop you on the street) and try to convince you to believe in some particular brand of religion?  Or your roommate who keeps nagging you about the dishes, or being too loud, etc.  Yeah, there's definitely *something* for *everyone*, where it matters.  Don't even start about the parents, whose only mission in life seems to be exerting unwanted control over yours.  And usually, if you have two or more people living together, you quickly become aware of all that stuff that you didn't realize really matters to you.  A lot.

Starting again in the brain, virtually every neuron is working in the service of control at one level or another.  At the most basic level, it is about +motor control, and a great example of the dedication of the brain to this particular function comes from a lowly sea squirt that starts off life as a mobile tadpole, and flits around in the ocean for a bit, looking for a good place to settle down.  As soon as it finds its special place on the reef where it stays for the rest of its life, it promptly eats its own brain!  Because, the whole point of the brain in the first place, evolutionarily speaking, is to process sensory inputs *in the service of producing useful motor outputs to improve survival and the overall quality of life*.  Plants don't need brains because they don't move, just like the post-tadpole sea squirt.  Makes you wonder about those stoners living in their parent's basement...

In the brains of most species, there are big chunks devoted to the compression and contrast processing of sensory inputs, and the rest is devoted to using that information to figure out what kinds of opportunities and threats are out there in the world, and how to best optimize chances of survival within the repertoire of available motor actions.  There is not much space left over for cultivating arcane knowledge about civil war battles, or fantasy role-playing games, or whatever other weird, seemingly non-functional things people spend their time doing (which just goes to show that *control* in people has mutated in strange ways, for better and for worse, but it is still strongly experienced).

The human brain takes this obsession with motor control to the next level in part by building an internal fortress / castle of the *self* (and we're not quite sure to what extent any other beast even has a similar kind of thing inside their own mental worlds).  The self is a +model, a construct, built up over years, that helps us predict how we are going to behave, and what we seem to really want (and not want).  By having such a thing inside our own brains, we can use it to more accurately anticipate what kinds of motor actions are really going to get us what we want.  This is especially important when dealing with other people, who are, compared to your average rock or tree, very complicated and unpredictable.  Indeed, the reason we have such big brains in the first place is to navigate this complex and dangerous social world --- we leverage our own internal self models to try to figure out what is going on inside the otherwise inaccessible heads of other people, ultimately so we can get what we want.

I'm not saying you are an egotistical, manipulative little jerk.  I'm saying *everyone* is an egotistical, manipulative little jerk, deep down. It is, again, just a logical extension of what brains are supposed to be doing.  If they aren't good for maximizing pleasure and minimizing harm, then we might as well all just eat them for dinner!

This *self model* lying at the heart of our control system is like our secret nuclear power reactor inside our brains.  It is the "nerve center" of our being --- depicted so aptly in the must-see Pixar movie, *Inside Out*.  It does *not* take existential threats kindly.  Anything that appears to threaten our internal sense of identity and control gets raised to the red alert level.  This is why you can't just "mansplain" something to someone else, and expect them to see the error of their ways, and instantly become a new, better self.  We have a lot of investment in that *old* self, and it does not look kindly on being deposed from its despotic rule over its own internal kingdom.

Developmentally, the self emerges around age two, heralded by the onset of *tantrums*.  Tantrums are the inevitable consequence of an emerging desire for control, coupled with an almost complete lack of *actual* control.  The extreme power of this emerging need for control is aptly captured by the metaphorical extreme energy of *scream power* captured in another Pixar classic, *Monsters, Inc*.  This struggle for control is the defining battle of life, and it never really ends: the best you can hope for is some kind of truce as expressed in the Serenity Prayer of Reinhold Niebuhr: "grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, courage to change the things I can, and wisdom to know the difference."  The enduring truth of this saying is testament to the central importance of control in our overall life happiness.

Although the self is a despot at heart, it is also remarkably sensitive to external, social forces, creating one of the most fundamental and puzzling paradoxes of the human condition:  We care deeply about what other people think of us, and are actually remarkably malleable in adapting our behavior under the influence of others, even though we crave control and seem to resist even the best-intentioned attempt to change our behavior.  There are many demonstrations of the power of social forces, from the evils of Nazi Germany and controversial attempts to recreate those forces in the lab (see [@sec:ch-soc] -- [@sec:ch-soc]), to the seemingly more benign and amusing phenomenon of +hypnosis.  Biologically and ecologically, our very survival is utterly dependent on our ability to work together socially, and social motivations are undoubtedly wired directly into the depths of our brains, providing pathways that can be "hijacked" to get past the watchful eye of the +self-model.

And therein lies the likely explanation for this paradox: these social forces can only act when delivered in ways that the self either does not recognize as threatening, or even endorses --- like the immune system, we are highly sensitive to foreign invaders.  The minute you are aware someone is trying to convince you of something, is the minute that it fails.  But when a social virus is neatly packaged in a nice sugar coating, often in terms of reinforcing a sense of belonging with an identified *in-group*, then it can easily slip past the guards.  These kinds of in-group / out-group (tribalism) dynamics are the strongest of social forces and underlie all our greatest evils (genocide, war, hate in all its forms).  But they are also the basis of *love* and social cohesion of groups at many levels (family, religious, civic, sports fans, etc).

The prevalence of cults and the seemingly obvious insanity and self-harm of those ensnared in their traps, is testament to the powerful forces at work here.  Unfortunately, some people have learned to tap into these powerful forces and abuse them to satisfy their own needs, of control over self and others.  This phenomenon is also evident in nationalist or populist political movements, which mine this same deep need for social belonging, to support the leader's power in ways that clearly go beyond any kind of rational socioeconomic-level considerations.  Understanding the nature of these powerful forces is thus something that transcends scientific disciplines and may be critical for the continued survival of our species --- psychology and neuroscience have never been more relevant!

In short, the social extension of control is *power*, when our internal despots are extended to control other people, and many social-level dynamics, as well as personality variables, can be understood in terms of power and control [@HopwoodWrightAnsellEtAl13].  Given that all of us truly are despotic rulers of our own selves, it is perhaps not so surprising why so many of our leaders end up being despots too.

### The Breakdown of Control

Unfortunately, achieving [*serenity now!*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Serenity_Now) is very difficult.  And all those challenges to the self can end up leading to a bout of +depression, often coupled with +anxiety or other unpleasant mental states.  Although widely characterized in terms of *anhedonia* or the inability to experience pleasure, current research supports the idea that the core disorder of depression is really about *control*, or the perceived lack thereof.  When your self model is sufficiently challenged, it basically gives up on a lot of goals, and unfortunately, achieving those goals is a primary source of pleasure and satisfaction in life.  So, yes,  anhedonia is a consequence of depression, but the core of it is more about the inability to motivate yourself to get out of bed and do all those now-meaningless things that you used to find meaningful.

Consistent with this central role for control, one of the most promising components of modern therapy for treating depression is *behavioral activation*, which is essentially an attempt to reboot your core self-motivation control system.  Indeed a major study found behavioral activation to be the most important element among a group of therapies, and as effective as medication [@DimidjianMartellHerman-DunnEtAl14].  And when you recognize the central role for control in depression, it is then less surprising that medications are relatively ineffective: for the vast majority of people, the problem is *not* about some kind of low-level imbalance in their brain chemistry: it is about their core mental power plant of control running out of steam.  And it takes hard mental work, aided by effective therapeutic treatments, to reboot your own sense of mental self-control and efficacy.

For the smaller proportion of people who clearly do have a biologically-based mental disorder, it is still the case that the brain areas most centrally involved in self-control are the ones that are most likely to be affected.  +Schizophrenia and +OCD for example involve the [frontal cortex](#frontal-cortex), [basal ganglia](#basal-ganglia), and +dopamine systems of the brain, which are the main players in developing and sustaining our internal self control system.  Thus, understanding how different parts of the brain function to support this critical self-model system is a major goal of current research in psychology and neuroscience, and this book is designed to get you started on a journey toward understanding this cutting-edge work.

## Other Principles and Perspectives

There are many candidates for "the fourth C", and different names could have been chosen to refer to the above "three C's" (e.g., reduction, relativity, and... respect?), but being subject to the simplifying force of *compression*, it is useful to try to see as much as possible through the lens of these three principles.  Furthermore, as briefly introduced above, these principles can be tied directly into the most fundamental properties of the nervous system, and thus provide a critical *bridging function* between neuroscience and psychology.  Nevertheless, it is important to always remain aware of all the compressing taking place, and to acknowledge that this radical attempt at synthesis may strike many practicing scientists as overly simplistic or downright wrong-headed.  However, my hope is that the benefits outweigh the costs overall, without attempting to overly minimize those costs.

## Where do we go from here?

This question can be asked at two levels: the short-term question of where this book is headed, and the longer-term question of where our species is headed!?  Although it may seem like our current cultural and political environment reflects an extreme magnification of many of the negative aspects of human mental function as described above, another perspective is that these truly are perennial battles and challenges that we have struggled with since the dawn of human history, and that they are borne of fundamental properties of the human brain that also have many positive aspects.  Like everything it seems, double-edged swords abound.  And the core premise, and promise, of science is that by understanding something deeply, we are better positioned to make the best of it.  This contrasts with the idea that by somehow reifying "bad" features of the human brain, we are therefore justifying the bad ends they produce.  That is certainly not the aim here.

With those big picture questions out of the way for now, we can turn to the plot for the rest of this adventure story through the human brain.  Unlike a good mystery story, we're going to ruin the whole thing right up front, in the hopes of achieving a better understanding and mental roadmap in the bargain.  However, before we do that, it is time for a quick quiz.  *Did you notice the fundamental flaw in this book yet?*  Anyone?

Yep, that's right: *compression* dictates that talking in great detail about all the stuff inside your head may seem just as relevant as figuring out how a car or bicycle actually works: look, I *already know* enough about how my brain works --- I'm walking (floating?) around inside it all the time!  I don't need some stupid book written by some smartass tryhard to tell me what I need to know about how people work!  *Especially* all that gory stuff about neuroscience --- how is that possibly relevant to my immediate social and life goals!?

Yeah, that's a tough one.  Let's confront it directly, honestly.  First, there's a decent subset of people who are already inclined to be interested in this stuff, and they can skip ahead to the next bit.  For the rest, here's some useful things to consider.  First, as was said above, there are plainly limits on how much anyone can be convinced to do anything, and each of you is in full, final *control* of how you spend your time.  That said, you should consider that likely *someone* is paying a decent chunk of cash for you to spend your time in college, learning this stuff.  Furthermore, you may very well look back on this time later in life, and wish that you had pulled your head out of your indolent young ass and realized that wasting this precious opportunity to actually learn something was really shortsighted.  On the other hand, you might well just "get away with it" and continue unscathed on your merry way, never looking back.  Again, the choice is yours.

For my part, here's what I can tell you about what to expect.  On the plus side, I have tried my best to make the book entertaining to read, using informal "real" language and real-world examples to illustrate the points, and I have also tried to make it as "mercifully" short as possible, so even if you end up hating it, there won't be nearly as much to hate as in a typical book in this area.  Nevertheless, this book is still going to be challenging for many students.  I have a big vision about how all this stuff works, and I really want to share it with you!  We will get into some serious, advanced science here, that is not typically covered in an introductory course.  I will always try to do this in the most approachable way possible, but there are limits: you may have to work hard to make sense of all this stuff.  And after all, is there any other topic more worth your time and effort than understanding your own brain --- something you use nearly every day!  Imagine what new levels of self-understanding and personal growth you can achieve, armed with all the secrets of your inner universe, all in one convenient colorfully illustrated package!

### Chapter Overview

* **[@sec:ch-sci]: Science and Subjectivity** provides a big-picture overview of the challenges and promise of achieving a scientific understanding of the brain and the mind (particularly the mind).  The main challenge here is the +subjective nature of the subject matter, which psychology has wrestled with since its inception.  Indeed, subjective experience is, according to the pioneering philosopher Rene Descartes (and many others), the only thing we know for certain, and it stands as a fundamental barrier for any attempt to transcend its bounds and achieve an +objective understanding of the world around us, and, especially, the world inside our subjective minds.  We discuss how the [scientific method](#scientific-method) can mitigate, but not eliminate, the challenges of subjectivity.  We then proceed to review the foundations and techniques involved in psychology and neuroscience research methods, including just a bit on *statistics*.  At a meta level, you'll see that the attempt to provide a comprehensive picture of the human mind in this book embraces the subjective level in an attempt to engage and motivate the reader --- subjective experience is primary, and everything here obviously just represents one subjective window onto the world.

* **[@sec:ch-neuro]: Neuroscience** covers the nuts and bolts of the brain, but always connected directly to the bigger picture via the three-C's principles and their applications. We'll see in detail how each neuron functions as such an amazing "information compactor", compressing those 1000's of signals into its single spiky output.  We'll then take an amazing "connected" voyage through the pathways of the neocortex, seeing how the great chain of neurons locked in their long-lasting embraces create channels where information flows in different ways.  We'll wrestle with the central question of whether brain areas are truly "specialized" for different functions or not, and whether there is any "there" there, as in, "where *is* that memory anyway?"

* **[@sec:ch-consc]: Consciousness, Drugs, Sleep and Dreams** dips into the fascinating shores of consciousness, sleep, and drugs, into the land of dreams and altered states of awareness, providing additional grist for the subjective nature of experience, and surprising insights into the way our brains work.  We have powerful *neuromodulatory* systems that are altered by psychoactive drugs, helping to reveal the ways in which these systems function when not-so-altered as well.

* **[@sec:ch-perc]: Sensation, Perception, and Attention** is all about how the first two C's: Compression and Contrast operate in sensation and perception, where we try to understand illusions like that shown earlier in Figure 0.1, and how it is that our brains typically deliver a *transparent* view of the world, where we usually see fairly accurately what is actually there (rare illusions aside).  Despite the automatic, effortless nature of our perceptual access to the world, it actually requires incredible feats of inference and insight, which our brains are performing every moment.

* **[@sec:ch-learn]: Learning, Motivation, and Emotion** tackles one of the most important unsolved questions in the field: how does our brain *learn* everything that we as adults so blithely take for granted?  Yeah, all that school was kind of hard maybe, but how exactly did you really learn everything?  Especially in those critical times before school-age learning, when you mastered perception, language, and got a good start on motor control.  Most intro textbooks focus almost exclusively on the decades-old behaviorist school of *conditioning* --- we'll cover that, but also give you a much more recent, cutting-edge sense of how new developments in AI and neuroscience may provide some insights into these fundamental puzzles.

* **[@sec:ch-mem]: Memory** picks up where learning leaves off: the fascinating, misty land of memory.  Where are all those childhood memories actually stored in your brain?  What is the difference between "motor memory" for how to ride a bike, versus knowing the capital of India, and other types of memories?  How can you improve your memory to get better grades in school, and also achieve a deeper understanding of things?

* **[@sec:ch-think]: Thinking, Control, and Intelligence** examines the upper echelons of your brain, where "thinking", reasoning, planning, and all that kind of advanced stuff take place.  What really is the difference between someone who is "smart" vs. not so much --- are so-called "intelligence" tests for real, or just a biased cultural artifact?

* **[@sec:ch-lang]: Language** just scratches the surface of the deep topic of language, and its critical role in shaping human thought.  Language is fundamentally a social activity, and we can learn a lot about ourselves through this lens.

* **[@sec:ch-soc]: Personality and Social Psychology** expands our horizons into the domains of social interactions and personality, focusing on the critical questions of how social forces shape our thoughts and behavior, and how people differ in the ways that they interact with others.  Two primary dimensions of social orientation and interaction: dominance -- submission, and the degree of warmth toward in-group members, can explain a wide swath of key findings, and define two of the "big 5" main personality factors.  The *self model* described above wrestles with these social forces in interesting ways, producing many surprising behaviors --- we really care much more about maintaining a sense of self control, compared to being logical or rational.

* **[@sec:ch-origins]: Origins: Evolution, Genetics, and Development** goes back to the beginning(s) and considers the evolution of the human brain and human behavior, how genetics shapes us relative to the role of experience (nature vs. nurture), and what we know about how we develop across the lifespan.  The specific trajectories of development reveal many important secrets about how our brains work, that are then obscured when we see a fully competent adult. 

* **[@sec:ch-disorders]: Disorders and Treatments** wraps up with the all-too-prevalent breakdowns in our amazing nervous systems in the form of the major mental disorders, and how these are treated through therapy and pharmacological interventions.  The most successful forms of modern therapy are based on basic, practical principles, and include a considerable focus on understanding and acceptance of how your brain functions, and rely on a particularly therapeutic form of social interaction.  In this way, this textbook might be considered a form of therapy: hopefully you will come away from this with a much deeper and more satisfying understanding of what makes you tick, and what ticks you off, so that you might go on to lead a happier and fulfilling life!

Typography tip (as a reward for reading all the way through!): **bold** is for keywords that are likely to show up on tests (and the summary of terms at the end), and *italics* is for important but less-likely-to-be-tested terms.  In case you haven't noticed yet, words like this: +neuron are linked into the Glossary at the end (in electronic media).

Also, as a general pedagogical note: there is a standard list of key points and terms that are generally expected to be covered in every intro psych textbook, which are interwoven into the text and listed as such in the summary listing at the end of each chapter, along with the more advanced points that are more unique to this text.  In addition to covering all the basic factual information, from my perspective, the most important goal of this text is to convey the excitement and big picture questions and concepts of this most interesting of fields, with the hope of stimulating further study and thought.  Thus, you are strongly encouraged to read the book sequentially as you would a novel, and hopefully this bigger story comes through!


