---
bibfile: ccnlab.bib
---

# Chapter 9: Personality and Social Psychology

One of the most prominent, biologically-grounded theories for what makes human beings so smart centers on our social orientation and the evolutionary forces that have shaped us to become so strongly dependent on others for our basic survival.  Specifically, in comparing human infants with our closest primate relatives, Michael Tomasello concluded that people have an innate desire to *share* (experiences, emotions, information, resources) that is notably stronger than in chimpanzees or other great apes [@Tomasello01].  This desire to share forms the foundation of *culture*, and without everything that we get from our culture, we are not much different than any other ape.  Culture (social transmission of knowledge) gives us *everything*: knowledge of what foods to eat and which to avoid, how to prepare them to maximize energy content (i.e., how to start a fire and grill stuff), how to farm, how to make tools, from primitive stone through all of the major "ages" of human history, up to now, the "information age", where it seems that every living being spends all their time sharing every last detail of their lives over the internet!

The social forces of *identity* and *belonging* rise to a crescendo through adolescence, driving so many seemingly irrational behaviors -- and by the time they become parents, somehow people forget what this time was like, and expect their kids to just be "normal", like they were a few years earlier.  This is the time when the mysterious evolutionary forces wielded by *hormones* turn our attention so strongly outward, to shape so fatefully our future roles in the larger world.  Much of literature and film remains obsessed with this *coming of age* dynamic which lies at the core of the *hero's journey*, recognized by Joseph Campbell in his 1949 book [@Campbell49] as the underlying plot structure of many stories from ancient mythology through to the modern day.

The plot starts with the relative comfort and security of childhood, which is disturbed by some kind of threat or call to adventure.  This is the impetus to leave the nest, which is initially refused, but stronger forces (often supernatural) conspire to force a crossing of the point of no return -- out into the mysterious wider world, where previously unknown strengths and abilities are discovered, and a newfound self understanding begins to emerge, often through social isolation.  In many cultures, this is ritualized in various *rites of passage* or *initiations* (e.g., bar and bat mitzvah; tattooing in Samoa) marking the transition to adulthood, and accompanied by an explicit process of separation, followed by various tests and challenges.  This deep-seated initiation schema is also employed to strong effect in cults, which likewise require rejection of the previous "normal" life, and often significant physical, painful acts that test and demonstrate their convictions.

One of the major hero's journey plot points involves learning about romantic love, and another, especially for the male-dominated version of the story, involves a oedipal conquest of some kind of dominant father figure, which represents the ultimate test and door to true freedom and self realization.  There's also a key role for various guides and teachers in helping the hero along (yay teachers!)  Finally, the victorious hero returns back to the homeland, bringing some kind of critical benefit (e.g., saving the world from ultimate destruction).  The plot of the Star Wars saga (episodes 4-6) illustrates this journey perfectly, where the hapless Luke is wrest from his family and must find his inner jedi across a series of tests, ultimately conquering his actual father in the ultimate battle to save the world from certain destruction.

The power and pervasiveness of this hero's journey *monomyth* speaks to the depth of social forces in shaping our very essence.  And from a more practical, functional perspective, the fundamentally *open-ended* nature of these social forces is critical for driving the open-ended, adaptive nature of human behavior and cognition.  Picking back up on our recurring theme of the importance of motivation in driving learning and intelligence, social forces provide a strong biologically-grounded motivational system that continuously changes as function of the ever-changing culture that surrounds us.  Food and drink just do not have that same open-ended character, and it is striking that the spontaneous language production of apes who have been taught sign language is just endless blabbering about these basic necessities of life. 

In other words, other apes never ascend beyond the bottom level of Maslow's hierarchy of needs (Figure 5.9), and this hierarchy is really the ladder that has enabled us to climb our way up into our current "enlightened" state of being.  The human child is strongly driven by love and belonging in the family context, and adolescence is all about moving to the next level up, of esteem, confidence, achievement, and respect from (and of) others.  Once you become a jedi master, you ascend to the highest level of self-actualization.

Despite the absolute dominance of social forces in shaping us, or perhaps because of it, people have a strong tendency to underestimate and outright reject the strength of these forces, especially in some cultures.  For example, in the strongly individualistic western cultures such as the USA, many people cultivate a strong sense of the individual as strongly self-sufficient, and those who depend on society as weak and inferior.  However, such people strongly underestimate how significantly their views are shaped by various social influences, and how completely their lives depend on the actions and good will of others.  The fascination with castaways, and its enduring incarnation in the Survivor TV series, likely stems from this basic conflict and longing for individual freedom in the face of all this social pressure!

This fundamental conflict between the individual and social forces is one of the major topics of social psychology, for example in exploring how people explain the behavior of self an others, known as **attribution** theory.  For example, the **fundamental attribution error** [@Ross77] is the tendency for people to over-emphasize **dispositional** attributes and under-emphasize **situational** factors, consistent with the individualistic, western-style mindset.

This conflict is also at the center of personality psychology, which has wrestled with the fundamental question of the extent to which there are strong, stable, coherent *dispositional* traits driving people's behavior across a range of different situations, which is the operational definition of **personality traits**.  Early challenges to personality psychology argued that most of behavior was driven by situational factors [@Mischel68], but there is now a strong consensus around the **big five** personality factors that have been replicated across many studies.  Most of these factors concern the interaction between the individual and their social environment, suggesting again the importance of social forces in shaping who we are.

Social and personality psychology as a field is focused on this critical interface between the individual and the broader social environment, and, in part due to practical limitations, the empirical studies often only involve a single individual, or a dyad (one of whom is often a *confederate* in the experiment, acting out a prescribed role). Considerable theorizing in the field is centered around the notion of the **self**, as it interacts with this broader social environment: what kind of internal model do we have of ourselves, how does this self-concept change as a result of different kinds of social interactions, and how does it shape our own behavior?  Despite this seemingly individual-focused perspective, there is a basic assumption that our self-understanding emerges out of our social interactions with others, and that our sense of self would be greatly diminished if we lived alone on a deserted island.

## The Subjective and Objective Self

To connect some of the core issues here with the earlier themes we've discussed, one can usefully distinguish between the subjective, first-person perspective on social and personality psychology, versus the attempt to describe a more objective account of the same phenomena.  For example, the notion of the self is, obviously, grounded inevitably in our own subjective experiences, and in this respect, the field wrestles with the enduring challenges of describing these subjective phenomena in an objective way.  When we discuss the self-concept, or how people try to explain the behavior of self and others, we are trying to characterize some kind of shared properties that might hold across the subjective experiences of people more generally.

To what extent do people have consistent features of their subjective self concepts?  How much of this is strongly shaped by cultural differences?  Does everyone really even have a self-concept in the first place?  To what extent do we need to invoke the construct of the *self*, apart from the subjective perspective of being a brain with all the various properties that we have discussed up to this point?  In particular, an important aspect of theorizing about the self in social psychology involves core aspects of motivation that we discussed previously -- is there a distinction between these two scientific traditions, or are they really describing the same things?  For example, the constructs of *self regulation* and *self control* are discussed within social psychology, but are they just synonymous with the functions of the prefrontal cortex in integrating affective and motivational signals with action plans to organize behavior in a way that is generally beneficial for the individual?  Is there some kind of additional self-consciousness or self-concept that is uniquely informed by social interactions, that plays a critical role in shaping these self control processes?

In contrast with the more subjectively focused notions of the self, the way that personality has come to be operationalized and understood is much more from the objective, outside perspective.  Instead of focusing on inherently first-person perspectives, the big-five personality factors characterize patterns of overt *behavior*, and there is a strong concern for validating these measures between self-report and the reports of other people (friends, relatives), and across different cultures.  Furthermore, the central reliance on the empirical, statistical technique of factor analysis, instead of a more theoretically-driven approach, results in a more objectively-focused framework.

### The Predictive Self-Model

One way of thinking about the subjective self in terms of the neural mechanisms discussed in earlier chapters, is as the intersection of **predictive learning** and **mirror neurons**.  Specifically, we have a strong tendency to create an internal self-model in order to accurately predict what actions we are likely to take, and to anticipate what kinds of reactions we might have to various different kinds of outcomes.  Thus, the self is just like any other stable factor that we perceive in the world (like size, color, shape, etc) -- to the extent that it provides a simpler, more compressed way of understanding (and predicting) what we experience, we perceive this stable construct instead of a more jumbled collection of stimuli.  In other words, we have self-constancy in the same way that we have size-constancy and all the other constancies as discussed in the perception chapter.

A compelling demonstration of this principle is provided by the **rubber hand illusion** [@BotvinickCohen98], where people (myself included -- I was a participant!) experienced a compelling subjective sensation that a rubber hand was their own hand, due to the convergence of visual and somatosensory sensations associated with synchronous brushing of the real hand and the rubber hand.  In other words, you see the rubber hand being brushed, and feel at precisely the same moment your own hand being brushed, and the simplest explanation for your brain is that you are looking at your own hand being brushed.  In the same way, we have a strong subjective sense of self, because it simplifies *all* of the different things that we experience under a single coherent construct.

These basic learning forces that create an internal self-model could also then be responsible for producing the behavior of mirror neurons, which appear to encode the intentions of motor actions produced by either the self or someone else that you are observing.  In other words, we learn the self-model to provide a compressed, predictive representation of everything that we experience, but once it has been learned, it can then become activated by other partial sensory inputs, i.e., visual input of another person's action, without all of the other subjective somatosensory stimuli associated with our own actions.  Furthermore, once we have this ability to map visual stimuli into our own internal self-representation in this way, that then enables everything from imitation to empathy.

TODO: cites of basic mirror neuron folks; Paulus

An important feature of this predictive self-model, as seen in the compelling nature of the rubber hand illusion, is that it is essentially *perceptual* in nature -- something that shapes the very way that we perceive the world, as contrasted with a more abstract, rational kind of understanding.

### Self Explanations

Historically, social psychology has long been concerned with how we understand the actions of self and others, e.g., in the form of **attribution theory**, which can be seen as tapping into this self-model.  However, the methodological techniques used in these studies consist largely of soliciting verbal explanations of different scenarios from individual participants, which may then be subject to a number of other possible forces beyond the more putatively perceptual basis of the predictive self-model.  Two interrelated phenomena have received considerable attention in this area:

* The **fundamental attribution error** (FAE) [@Ross77], which is the observed tendency for people to attribute the causes of people's behavior to internal, **dispositional** factors, instead of recognizing relevant **situational** factors.  For example, if we observe someone speeding down the freeway, we tend to say "what a jerk" instead of recognizing that there may be important situational factors causing that behavior (e.g., they may be rushing to the hospital).

* The **actor-observer asymmetry** [@JonesNisbett71] holds that the FAE applies specifically when we are interpreting the behavior of others (i.e., as an observer), but when we are explaining our own behavior as the actor, we actually tend to have the opposite bias, emphasizing situational variables instead of dispositional ones.

Despite all the attention, these findings remain controversial, and a recent metanalysis found no strong evidence for the replicability of the actor-observer asymmetry in general [@Malle06].  Instead, it only held when considering negative behaviors, in which case the bias to attribute self-behavior to situational factors is consistent with the well-established *self-serving bias*, which we consider in more detail below.  TODO: more here.


## Self and Control

The relationship between self and **control** is a major focus in the field, in various ways.  First, a number of different phenomena have been associated with a broad **self-serving bias**, that serves to promote and retain a positive self-concept.  People in general have a tendency to over-estimate their own self-importance and self-worth relative to others.  For example, self-report measures show that most people think of themselves as being above-average on a range of positive dimensions, and below-average on negative ones. Statistically of course this cannot be the case.  Likewise, you may have experienced the distinct feeling that you do way more of the housework than your roommate or spouse, while they have the exact same feeling about you!

We can understand this self-serving bias as reflecting a strong underlying need to maintain an overall sense of *control* by the self, even if it ends up being illusory.  First, there is the inescapable premise that, if you are in fact in control of yourself, then you only have yourself to blame if things are going badly, so this builds in a strong motivation to inflate your self-evaluations.  And when there may be some stronger indications that things might be going badly, we have a strong tendency to blame others, or those situational factors as discussed above, so as to preserve our own positive self-efficacy ratings.

One of the most compelling and oft-discussed pheneomena here is **cognitive dissonance** [@Festinger57], which arises when there is a discrepancy between your behavior and your internal self-model.  In such a case, you will tend to either change your self-model to fit your observed behavior (if that is acceptable), or change your behavior to better fit your self-model, or alter your perception of the mismatch in the first place.  Critically, the discrepancy between the behavior and the self-model cannot be left unaddressed -- it is experienced as aversive and must be resolved in some way.  This is generally consistent with the idea that prediction (or postdiction) errors drive the learning of our self-models.

The famous experiment testing the predictions of cognitive dissonance had participants performing an hour of boring and monontonous tasks.  Some of the participants were asked to tell the next subject (who was actually a confederate) that the experiment was extremely enjoyable, for which they were either paid $1 or $20.  This lie created dissonance with their actual experience.  All participants then rated how they felt about the task -- those who were paid $1 and experienced the dissonance actually rated the task as significantly more enjoyable than those in the other conditions, presumably because they needed to reconcile the dissonance. Interestingly, those paid $20 apparently felt sufficiently compensated for lying ($20 was actually a lot of money back then), so they did not experience the same dissonance.

More generally, cognitive dissonance often amounts to *rationalizing*, or coming up with sensible excuses or reasons to explain an anomolous or negative situation.

* marshmallow task. and recent updates

## Control and Power

* social comparison -- downward, upward

* Hopwood stuff


